Disk Partitioning is the process of dividing a disk into one or more logical areas, often known as partitions, on which the user can work separately. 
It is one step of disk formatting. If a partition is created, the disk will store the information about the location and size of partitions in the partition table. 
With the partition table, each partition can appear to the operating system as a logical disk, and users can read and write data on those disks. 
The main advantage of disk partitioning is that each partition can be managed separately.

Why do we need it?

To upgrade Hard Disk (to incorporate a new Hard Disk into the system)
Dual Booting (Multiple Operating Systems on the same system)
Efficient disk management
Ensure backup and security.
Work with different File Systems using the same system.
How to Partition Disks in Linux?
(For the purpose of demonstration Cent OS 7 and VMware are used in the screenshots of the article.)

In order to successfully partition a disk and to make it useful, we need to ensure that we have completed the below four steps, regardless of the Operating system and Hardware of the system.


Attach the disk to the proper port.
Create partitions in the disk.
Create a file system on the partition.
Mounting the file systems 
Attaching Disk:
This step points to physically connecting the disk to the system. The below screenshot specifies the system configuration of my CentOS 7. 

Initial configuration of my system
Initial configuration of my system

It is clearly specified that the system has only 20 GB of Hard Disk. After installing the necessary software and downloading some movies, I found that the system Hard Disk is almost completely used up. Now I will have two options in front of me, either buy a new system with a higher Hard Disk capacity or upgrade the existing one. Most of you will go for the second option, just like me, unless the system is very old. Let us upgrade the system with an additional 20 GB of Hard Disk.

In order to attach the new virtual Hard Disk in VMware, click on the “Edit virtual machine settings” link and choose the Add option on the next window. 

Attaching Disk:
Attaching Disk

Choose the Hard Disk option and move forward.

Type of hardware to install
Type of hardware to install

Choose the recommended disk type. (SCSI is recommended here since the Operating System that I am using is CentOS)

Select a Disk Type
Select a Disk Type

Complete the attachment of the disk by specifying the required size of Hard Disk needed and choosing the recommended selections.

After attaching the new virtual Hard Disk
After attaching the new virtual Hard Disk

The final configuration shows that our system has a new Hard Disk of 20 GB size. The newly added Hard disk is of no use to our system unless we complete the remaining steps.

Create Partitions in the Disk
Power on the system and log in to the system. Ensure that you are logged in as root (or any user of the sudo group). Once the system UI comes up, open the Terminal.  
To view the available Hard Disks in our system, use the command lsblk or cat /proc/partitions. Both commands will display the same results, but in different ways. 

lsblk
Create partitions in the disk
Create partitions in the disk

We can find that the system has two disks -> sda and sdb. sda is our older Hard Disk. We can say so, as that disk is already partitioned as sda1 and sda2. 
We can partition the disk using CLI as well as GUI. We will demonstrate CLI based partitioning in this article.

fdisk -l 
fdisk -l 
fdisk -l 

We found that the Hard Disk that we are going to partition can be found at /dev/sdb. Use the command.

fdisk /dev/sdb
It will take us to a different console where we can use the partitioning specific commands. We will be concentrating more on the following commands (or flags).

m  -> help
p  -> print partition table
n  -> create new partition
d  -> delete partition
q  -> quit without writing
w  -> write to disk
While partitioning, we should be aware of certain factors. 

On a disk, we can have a maximum of four partitions.
The partitions are of two types.
Primary
Extended
Extended partitions can have logical partitions inside it.
Among the four possible partitions, the possible combinations are.
All 4 primary partitions
3 primary partitions and 1 extended partition
fdisk /dev/sdb
fdisk /dev/sdb

n
This will create a new partition. Specify the type of partition using the p for primary and e for extended.

p
This will create a primary partition. The console will prompt for the number to be given to the partition. We can give any number from 1 to 4. Let me give 1. Then choose the starting position (cylinder) of partition 1. Press enters to start partitioning from the beginning of the disk. 

You can specify the size of the partition in two ways, either as the last cylinder number or by specifying the size directly. If we need partition1 to be of 4 GB size (as a whole number), use.

+4G 
Pressing enter will create our 1st partition successfully. Follow the same steps, until we create 4 partitions on our newly attached disk. 

create our 1st partition successfully
create our 1st partition successfully

We have created 3 primary partitions and an extended partition in the disk. The extended partition, as the name suggests, can be further divided into multiple logical partitions. Once 4 partitions are created, no more partitions can be created on the same disk. We can check whether we have done the partitioning in the right way by printing the partition table using the p command. If everything is as per the expectation, then write the changes to the disk using the w command, else use the q command to quit without writing. 


 

Create a File System on the Partition
Computers use particular kinds of file systems to store and organize data on media, like Hard Disk, CD, DVD, etc. The commonly used Linux file systems are ext2, ext3, ext4, JFS, ReiserFS, XFS, FAT (usually in Windows OS) and B-treeFS. Inorder to specify the file system to be used in each partition, we can use the mkfs (make file system) command.

mkfs.ext4 -j /dev/sdb1
What this command does is that it will make the first partition’s file system to be ext4 (format the partition to ext4). -j flag is used to allow/support journaling. It helps in throwing errors into the journal, in case of system failure.

mkfs.fat /dev/sdb2
This command is used to format the 2nd partition available in /dev/sdb2 to the FAT file system. Even though we formatted the disks, it is of no use to us, unless we mount it on a directory.

Create a file system on the partition
Create a file system on the partition

Mounting the file systems 
Let us make three directories, for mounting the first, second, and third partition using the mkdir (make directory) command.

mkdir /mount1
mkdir /mount2
mkdir /mount3
Mounting the formatted partitions can be achieved using the mount command.

mount /dev/sdb1 /mount1
mount /dev/sdb2 /mount2
mount /dev/sdb3 /mount3
The first part of the command is the keyword mount, followed by the partition and the directory to which the mounting is to be done. To view the disk details, we can use the df command. h flag helps to display the output in a human-readable format.

df -h
Mounting the file systems 
Mounting the file systems 

Unmounting a disk can be achieved by unmount command.

unmount /dev/sdb2
All these mountains are temporary in nature. Once we reboot the system, mounting will be reverted. To make it permanent, we must edit the File System Table of the Operating System. We should be highly careful whirling with this file. A small error in this file can cause the system to be unbootable and can make the entire system to be useless. Let us open the file in any editor (I will be using the VI editor).

vi /etc/fstab
fstab(File System Table) file
fstab(File System Table) file

Add our mounted file systems’ details in the file, in the order.

mounted partition        [ space ]         directory      [ space ]           file system type          [ space ]          defaults         [ space ]         0            [ space ]             0 

Save the file and come back to the terminal. Mount the partitions permanently using the mount -a command 

mount -a
Mounting the file systems 
Mounting the file systems 

We can verify whether our partitions are available for our purposes by visiting the root folder of the Operating System (since we have mounted the partitions on the mount1, mount2, mount3 directories in the root folder). We can also verify the existence of our newly created partitions using the lsblk command. 

lsblk
We can find our partitions in the table, each of 4 GB size.

lsblk
lsblk

Conclusion
In this article we have discussed disk partitioning, which is the process of dividing a disk into a separate logical area that are known as partitions. One can easily understand enabling efficient disk management, facilitates dual booting, ensures backup and security by understanding this article. Proper disk partitioning is important for effective storage utilization and system administration.


Last Updated : 09 Jun, 2023

15

Similar Reads
1.
Disk Partitioning in Ubuntu using GParted
2.
Checking Disk Space in Linux Using Command-Line
3.
Quickly Analyzing Disk Usage Statistics Using Filelight in Linux
4.
Gdu – Faster Disk Usage Analyzer for Linux
5.
Discus - Show Colourised Disk Space Usage in Linux
6.
How to Add New Disk in Linux CentOS 7 Without Rebooting
7.
Disk cloning in Linux using dd command
8.
Pydf - Check disk space usage with colored output
9.
Shell Script to Check Disk Space Usage
10.
Menu Driven Shell Script to Check Memory and Disk Usages
Related Tutorials
1.
Linux Tutorial
2.
Introduction to Monotonic Stack - Data Structure and Algorithm Tutorials
3.
Linux Commands
4.
Two Pointers Technique
5.
Window Sliding Technique
Previous
How to Add OnClickListener to Marker on Google Maps in Android?
Next
Guide to Install and Setup Visual Studio for Android App Development
Article Contributed By :
https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/auth/avatar.png
abhirajkr
abhirajkr
 Follow
Vote for difficulty
Current difficulty : Easy
Easy
Normal
Medium
Hard
Expert
Improved By :
jayes5h62
Article Tags :
Technical Scripter 2020
Linux-Unix
Technical Scripter
Improve Article
Report Issue
Join our Community
Courses
Upto 30% Offcourse-img
55k+ interested Geeks
GATE CS & IT 2024
Explore
Upto 30% Offcourse-img
79k+ interested Geeks
Mastering System Design: From Low-Level to High-Level Solutions
Explore
Upto 30% Offcourse-img
12k+ interested Geeks
Complete Test Series for Service-Based Companies
Explore

geeksforgeeks-footer-logo
A-143, 9th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector-136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh - 201305
feedback@geeksforgeeks.org
GFG App on Play Store
GFG App on App Store
Company
About Us
Legal
Careers
In Media
Contact Us
Advertise with us
Explore
Job-A-Thon For Freshers
Job-A-Thon For Experienced
GfG Weekly Contest
Offline Classes (Delhi/NCR)
DSA in JAVA/C++
Master System Design
Master CP
Languages
Python
Java
C++
PHP
GoLang
SQL
R Language
Android Tutorial
Data Structures
Array
String
Linked List
Stack
Queue
Tree
Graph
Algorithms
Sorting
Searching
Greedy
Dynamic Programming
Pattern Searching
Recursion
Backtracking
Web Development
HTML
CSS
JavaScript
Bootstrap
ReactJS
AngularJS
NodeJS
Computer Science
GATE CS Notes
Operating Systems
Computer Network
Database Management System
Software Engineering
Digital Logic Design
Engineering Maths
Python
Python Programming Examples
Django Tutorial
Python Projects
Python Tkinter
OpenCV Python Tutorial
Python Interview Question
Data Science & ML
Data Science With Python
Data Science For Beginner
Machine Learning Tutorial
Maths For Machine Learning
Pandas Tutorial
NumPy Tutorial
NLP Tutorial
Deep Learning Tutorial
DevOps
Git
AWS
Docker
Kubernetes
Azure
GCP
Competitive Programming
Top DSA for CP
Top 50 Tree Problems
Top 50 Graph Problems
Top 50 Array Problems
Top 50 String Problems
Top 50 DP Problems
Top 15 Websites for CP
System Design
What is System Design
Monolithic and Distributed SD
Scalability in SD
Databases in SD
High Level Design or HLD
Low Level Design or LLD
Top SD Interview Questions
Interview Corner
Company Wise Preparation
Preparation for SDE
Experienced Interviews
Internship Interviews
Competitive Programming
Aptitude Preparation
GfG School
CBSE Notes for Class 8
CBSE Notes for Class 9
CBSE Notes for Class 10
CBSE Notes for Class 11
CBSE Notes for Class 12
English Grammar
Commerce
Accountancy
Business Studies
Economics
Management
Income Tax
Finance
UPSC
Polity Notes
Geography Notes
History Notes
Science and Technology Notes
Economics Notes
Important Topics in Ethics
UPSC Previous Year Papers
SSC/ BANKING
SSC CGL Syllabus
SBI PO Syllabus
SBI Clerk Syllabus
IBPS PO Syllabus
IBPS Clerk Syllabus
Aptitude Questions
SSC CGL Practice Papers
Write & Earn
Write an Article
Improve an Article
Pick Topics to Write
Write Interview Experience
Internships
Video Internship
@geeksforgeeks , Some rights reserved
We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using o
